---
layout: blog_archive
author: Sam Stephenson
author_url: http://conio.net/
sections: Featured, blog
title: "Prototype 1.6.0.2: Bug fixes, performance improvements, and security"
---

Today we're releasing "Prototype 1.6.0.2":http://prototypejs.org/download to address several compatibility and performance issues and to protect against a potential security issue for developers using Prototype outside of a web browser environment.


Prototype 1.6.0.2 is a backwards-compatible, drop-in replacement recommended for all 1.6.0 users.  We've fixed 28 bugs and made over a dozen improvements to the code base, including performance improvements for CSS selectors in Safari 3 and for the @Element#up/#down/#next/#previous@ and @Event#findElement@ methods in all browsers.  We're also now officially supporting the Opera browser, version 9.25 and higher.  You can get the full scoop on all the changes in the "1.6.0.2 CHANGELOG":http://dev.rubyonrails.org/browser/spinoffs/prototype/tags/rel_1-6-0-2/CHANGELOG.

Among the numerous bug fixes is a change to the way @Ajax.Request@ handles automatic JavaScript response evaluation.  Previous versions of Prototype relied on the browser's @XMLHttpRequest@ same-origin policy to ensure that response bodies with a content type of @text/javascript@ were safe to evaluate. "Alexey Feldgendler":http://my.opera.com/feldgendler/ from Opera kindly alerted us to the possibility that certain non-browser environments (like Opera's widget system) do not enforce the same-origin policy and as such may be subject to cross-domain script exploits.  To combat this we've added an @Ajax.Request#isSameOrigin@ method which returns true when a request is being made to the same domain, port, and protocol as the document.  Furthermore, Prototype will no longer automatically evaulate JavaScript response bodies when this method returns false.

We've also backported the aforementioned security fix for those of you still using Prototype 1.5.  "Prototype 1.5.1.2":http://prototypejs.org/assets/2008/1/25/prototype-1.5.1.2.js is a backwards-compatible, drop-in replacement recommended for all 1.5.1 and 1.5.1.1 users.

h3. Download, report bugs, and get help

* "Download Prototype 1.6.0.2":http://prototypejs.org/assets/2008/1/25/prototype-1.6.0.2.js
* "Submit bug reports":http://dev.rubyonrails.org/ to Rails Trac
* "Get Prototype help":http://prototypejs.org/discuss on the rails-spinoffs mailing list or #prototype IRC channel
* "Interact with the Core Team":http://groups.google.com/group/prototype-core on the prototype-core mailing list

As always, thanks to the core team and the many users who contributed bug reports and well-tested patches for this release.



